Medtronic: A Healthy, Painless Investment
The medtech space is characterized by the presence of rational oligopolies.

Moreover, the market for medical devices will grow at a fast clip in the years ahead.

Medtronic is one of most domineering and innovative companies within this burgeoning arena.
1) Does Medtronic have strong and durable competitive advantages over competitors?
Yes: 1 Point

Like many other success stories, Medtronic also started out in a garage. Founded in Minneapolis by Earl Bakken and Palmer Hermundslie a mere four years after the end of World War 2, Medtronic has long been synonymous with cardiovascular care. Such humble beginnings as a hospital equipment repair shop did not prevent it from being considered, many years later, as "the best medical company in the world." Back in 1949, the concept of implanting electrical contraptions in the human body to treat chronic diseases was nothing more than a bizarre, Frankenstein-like vision. But, driven by the technological prowess gained by the US during that defining era, cardiac medicine was finally ready to accept such a revolutionary concept.

Fuelled by strong organic growth and by a vast string of acquisitions, Medtronic is now one of the world's largest standalone medtech companies. This leading position was reached in 2014 when the company acquired Covidien for USD 43 billion in a tax-inversion deal. The tax-inversion transaction allowed a reduction of the tax burden and it freed up a massive amount of money - of about USD 10 billion - that Medtronic will leverage into new acquisitive deals. The company also plans to repurchase stock, accelerate debt payments, and crank up its R&D efforts.
The mega-merger with Covidien brought additional R&D capabilities, a massive portfolio of new devices and a greatly expanded footprint to Medtronic's business. The company stated that it is harvesting significant cost synergies ahead of schedule, even as some segments continue to struggle - particularly Spinal therapies, whose sales dropped about 2% - and despite pervading foreign currency headwinds.

The combined company is a medtech behemoth that manufactures and sells medical devices and therapies for treating more than 30 different chronic diseases across hundreds of markets; a truly fearsome player in the medtech battlefield, Medtronic counts more than 85.000 employees in 160 countries around the world, and - according to Medtronic's CEO Omar Ishrak - two patients per second now benefit from the company's life-saving technologies.

The company's competitive advantages stem from its leading market positioning across multiple therapeutic areas that rely on very 'hard-to-replicate' and complex technological solutions used to treat a host of highly prevalent medical conditions. This leading position is reinforced by its well-known products among healthcare professionals and by a relentless focus on creating valuable intellectual property.

Historically, Medtronic has been the medtech company with the most granted patents; in effect, by leveraging its substantial patent portfolio, Medtronic is frequently the first company to arrive and settle a given unexplored dominion. Medtronic currently owns an enormous intellectual property portfolio translated in more than 53.000 patents, a fact that creates significant barriers to entry in the markets settled by the company. Such enviable prowess in the medtech arena was bolstered still further with the acquisition of Covidien, a very strong medtech player in its own right.
Another competitive advantage is the company's massive size, which results in economies of procurement and scale. Besides wielding more influence with clients, larger players can spread costs over wider productive bases, and they also display a greater capacity to maintain attractive pricing strategies. Switching costs are also very high because surgeons often require specific training and tools on how to use a particular device from a particular company (this phenomenon is not so ubiquitous in cardiac devices since their implantation does not differ that much between competing products).

Medtronic also benefits from its deeply entrenched position within the healthcare landscape - in reality, it is very difficult to extricate a medtech player from its acquired position once it gets established in the therapeutic workflow. This fact creates both high switching costs (again) and very close relationships between Medtronic and healthcare professionals.

Also, by working with many different hospitals around the world, Medtronic can harness its immense knowledgebase to benchmark a hospital against its peers in order to share best practices with their clients in the management of catheterization labs (cath labs) and operating rooms (OR's). Such 'value-driven' services create a virtuous cycle where knowledge feeds into best practices - and best returns on capital employed - while keeping competitors at bay. This solid entrenchment with clients also provides stickier relationships and provides deeper insights into how its offerings are utilized in different clinical circumstances.

The medtech industry needs to address several challenges imposed by demographic trends, disruptive technologies, increasing healthcare costs and constant policy reforms, both in the US and abroad. Such challenges are creating (obviously) both threats and opportunities. The companies that will succeed within this ever changing environment are the ones capable of developing flexible operational models, rational cost structures, and value-accretive solutions to healthcare providers and their patients.
Medtronic seems to tick all the right boxes within this context. As showed by the swallowing of Covidien, Medtronic occupies a rather enviable position at the very pinnacle of the food chain in the medtech industry. Establishing such a position requires massive investments in both SG&A and R&D, nurtured within a corporate culture of excellence. Now, by being able to offer complete packages - that include everything from high-tech pacemakers, to integrated services and to low-tech ventilation tubes - Medtronic has a better chance of winning over the hearts and minds of cost-conscious hospitals and governments. There are good reasons to assume that this American colossus has one of the most impregnable moats across the healthcare landscape.

2) Does Medtronic operate within an attractive market?
Yes: 1 Point

Fuelled by aging populations in Europe, America and Japan - and by recently acquired wealth in China and in India - the medtech industry is poised to see sustained growth for many years into the future. According to a EvaluateMedTech Preview report, the worldwide medical device market will grow at a CAGR of 4.1% (some other estimates expect a CAGR of 4.6%) annually through 2020, pushing total industry sales to a massive USD 477.5 billion. This is a very attractive arena and, in reality, some of Medtronic's markets are rational oligopolies; that's the case regarding the markets for implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs), pacemakers, heart valves and coronary stents.

Valued at USD 30 billion, the global orthopedic devices market is also an oligopoly where only a few large players dominate over 80% of the share; besides Medtronic, other dominant companies in this market include Zimmer Biomet (NYSE:ZBH), Stryker (NYSE:SYK), Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ), and Smith & Nephew (NYSE:SNN). The nascent TAVR (Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement) market seems to be a duopoly, as well, between Medtronic and Edwards Lifesciences (NYSE:EW); Boston Scientific (NYSE:BSX) and Symetis are rather minor players in this arena. According to GlobalData, the TAVR market is expected to reach a value of about USD 3 billion by 2020.
Medtronic operates both in the therapeutic and diagnostic medical markets throughout the world; the company's varied product lines face a vast combination of competitors, ranging from large manufacturers with multiple business lines (exemplified by Johnson & Johnson) to smaller manufacturers offering a limited selection of products, like Insulet (NASDAQ:PODD). Other notable competitors include Abbott Labs (NYSE:ABT), C.R. Bard (NYSE:BCR), Baxter (NYSE:BAX), LivaNova (NASDAQ:LIVN), Roche (OTCQX:RHHBY), DexCom (NASDAQ:DXCM) and Tandem (NASDAQ:TNDM).

Established players like Medtronic also compete with low-cost, aggressive manufacturers from emerging countries, like Mindray Medical (NYSE:MR), the largest medical equipment manufacturer in China. But the company is already wielding its might across emerging markets, and it is expecting to grow at (about) a 11.5% CAGR over the next few years in developing economies. Last year, revenue from emerging countries grew about 14%; Medtronic intends to increase the penetration of existing therapies in these largely untapped markets, rather than introducing new ones with uncertain acceptance among healthcare providers.

The company is especially dominant in Cardiology and in Diabetes, two very promising growth markets. Preceded by In Vitro Diagnostics, Cardiology is the second largest medical device area by overall sales; in fact, more than one in every ten medical devices sold worldwide is a cardiovascular device. According to EvaluateMedTech, the Cardiology sector has rather good growth prospects with a CAGR of 5.1% up to 2020.

On the other hand, according to the World Health Organization, the number of people with diabetes has risen from 108 million in 1980 to 422 million in 2014. About 30 million Americans have diabetes, making it one of the deadliest, costliest and fastest-growing chronic diseases in the US. The demand for diabetes management devices is anticipated to grow rapidly based on factors such as the increasing geriatric population, or the obesity epidemic among every age bracket. Medtronic currently possesses several products that serve this growing market.
Challengers to Medtronic sometimes materialize in the form of lower-cost producers and in the form of start-ups or medium-sized companies with new technological breakthroughs. If the technology is promising, the latter are frequently swallowed by the larger companies; the former are sometimes rendered toothless because clinical effectiveness, not price, is the prime differentiator between medtech companies. Besides their obvious competitors, Medtronic has equally to contend with powerful healthcare stakeholders, the relentless pressure to reduce costs, and more complex healthcare services; finally, the company also competes with providers of other medical therapies, such as a few pharmaceutical companies.

3) Is Medtronic a dominant company within its markets?
Yes: 1 Point

Medtronic is the worldwide leader in Cardiac Rhythm Disease Management, in Neuromodulation, and in Spinal Therapies. Medtronic's market share in Cardiac Rhythm management is about 23-25% - in aggregate, cardiovascular technology remains the leading product area for the company, comprising about 45% of its overall sales. Even before acquiring Covidien, more than half of Medtronic's net sales came from its cardiovascular segment; Covidien brought along a USD 1.2 billion per year cardiology business to the company, further strengthening its supremacy over this strategic market. Now, on a combined basis, the new Medtronic/Covidien entity possesses multiple billionaire products both in cardiology and across several other clinical fields.

The global market for pacemakers, in particular, is dominated by the Big Three (Boston Scientific, St. Jude Medical/Abbott and Medtronic); together, these companies also control about 90% of the market in the US. Besides possessing an almost insurmountable leadership in cardiology, Medtronic also controls about 25% of the market for spinal therapies, making the company the world leader in this field. Medtronic is also expecting to become the largest insulin-pump provider in the world by 2020; there are a couple of much smaller competitors in this market, like Insulet and Tandem, that may be subjected to a takeover
Medtronic is equally a major player in the medical automation market. This market is characterized by products that automate repetitive and simple tasks such as sampling, scanning of consumables, and monitoring of parameters. It is also a growing market owing to the advantages of reducing the workload imposed on healthcare staff.

Dragged by underwhelming performance in therapies like brain modulation and pain stimulation, Medtronic has been slowly losing market share in the restorative therapies market over the past few years. But despite these unavoidable setbacks, Medtronic is expecting to achieve mid-single-digit growth in restorative therapies by 2021.

As a clear sign of dominance, Medtronic seems to have overtaken Johnson & Johnson as the largest medical device maker in the world. By 2020, Medtronic will reach sales of about USD 35 million, while Johnson & Johnson will fall to the second spot, followed by Siemens (OTC:SMQFY), Roche, Becton Dickinson (NYSE:BDX), Stryker, Abbott, General Electric (NYSE:GE), Danaher (NYSE:DHR), and Philips (NYSE:PHG). Medtronic will also become the largest R&D spender in the medtech landscape. There seems to be no doubt that Medtronic is poised to dominate its strategic markets in the years (and decades) ahead.

4) Does Medtronic have a clear runway to grow and compound value over an extended time frame?
Yes: 1 Point

Relentless innovation is one of Medtronic's strategies to spur sustained growth; the others are to expand its presence in international markets (with a focus on emerging economies), to acquire promising companies, and to provide integrated, value-based healthcare solutions to its clients.

Medtronic's Growth Drivers | Value-based Integrated Services and Solutions

Medtronic is trying to gradually transform itself into a chronic disease management company. Besides marginal product developments, medtech companies now need to demonstrate real economic and clinical added value. Being so, the company is striving to build up an integrated business model - across the entire value chain - so as to capture profits along the full healthcare continuum. Medtronic, which is targeting a 32% CAGR in services over the next five years, is already a leading provider of integrated solutions for a broad spectrum of therapeutic areas.


