GeoPark: Durable Growth For A Song
GeoPark, a micro-cap oil company, has every necessary quality to grow into mid/large-cap. Buy now to enjoy growth-driven multiyear compounding and possibly reap multi-bagger returns.

GeoPark operates country franchises consisting of cash flow generating fields and exploration blocks with huge upside potential, each delivering internal tax efficiency, all risk-balanced by following the barbell strategy.

GeoPark has a long runway for years of durable value-adding growth, protected by sustainable competitive advantage, including first-mover, exclusive rights to acreage, high quality reserves and low cost production.

The management aligns their interest properly with that of shareholders, and is capable of low-cost friendly capital raising, prudent capital allocation, holistic risk management and nearly perfect execution of strategy.

With reproduction/earnings power/growth values offering >47-81% margin of safety, GeoPark is a deep-value, high-quality, hidden gem growth stock, and deserves to be ranked a high-conviction strong buy.
There might be something mysterious about vouching early for a precocious business. To watch the little firm struggle through adolescence, bloom in youth and prosper into maturity can really stir some deep-seated human emotions. Even for the proverbial handsome return, who on earth does not want to root for an IBM when it still goes by the moniker of the Computing-Tabulating-Recording Company, or a Wal-Mart when it operates only a few discount stores in state of Arkansas? To prophesy the next IBM or Wal-Mart is the holy grail for growth investors. But is it possible? According to Philip A. Fisher in literature and Warren Buffett in practice, the answer is yes.

Having examined its asset portfolio by poring over volumes of news releases, quarterly updates and annual reports, scuttlebutted about its business strategy in the oilmen's circle, and monitored every major move of its management over the years, we venture to submit to readers a company, which, steered by capable hands, still has a long runway to continue its value-adding expansion for years to come. The company, presently a micro-cap, seems to be on the way to become a mid-cap or even large-cap in the future; consequently, it is expected to deliver multi-bagger returns for those who have the prescience to get aboard now. The company is GeoPark (NYSE: GPRK), a Bermuda-registered, Buenos Aires, Argentina-headquartered oil and gas company with operations across Latin America.

1. Introduction

As a preamble, let us have a bird's eye view of the petroleum industry. We will focus on the upstream, i.e., exploration and production (E&P), segment of that industry. The oilmen follow a similar process in prospecting for hydrocarbons as in real developers improving land for residential use.

The oilmen start by looking for petroliferous land, while searching they probably chant something similar to real developers' mantra "location, location, location".
Once exploration rights are secured, they will need to raise capital in large quantity, advance geological and geophysical leads in the acreage to drillable prospects, and test these prospects by drilling exploratory wells.
Upon discovering hydrocarbons, they will need to conduct engineering planning and financial forecast to make sure there are enough petroleum reserves underground to be extracted economically and environmentally responsibly using available technology.
In order to monetize the reserves, they will still need to drill production wells into the petroleum reservoirs, install surface infrastructures, and transport the produced hydrocarbons to market to generate a cash flow in order for the company to recover sunken costs and make profits.
When hydrocarbon prospecting know-how and funds are deployed to an acreage, oil or natural gas may be found. When petroleum engineering expertise and capital are allocated to developing reserves in a field, oil or gas will come on stream. Thus, the E&P process involves a myriad of decisions made by the management and its team, which ultimately lead to reserves and production of the company. In a way, hydrocarbon reserves and production are the permanent and physical manifestation of oilmen's capability in geoscience research, fund-raising and capital deployment, which are intangible and transient by nature. In summary, it is the asset portfolio that we should primarily focus on when we try to understand an upstream oil company, to know about its management, and to ascertain the existence of a competitive advantage.

In a 1976 letter, Warren Buffett wrote, "I always have been attracted to the low cost operator in any business and, when you can find a combination of an extremely large business, a more or less homogenous product, and a very large gap in operating costs between the low cost operator and all of the other companies in the industry, you have a really attractive investment situation." The E&P sector is just such an industry, wherein participants compete mainly on price by selling essentially homogenized commodities to a huge addressable market. It follows that we should look for "the low cost operator" in the oil industry. Sources of low costs specific to the industry may include any combination of the following:

privileged access to land for many state oil companies such as Saudi Aramco and CNOOC;
exclusive exploration and exploitation rights over a long period of time to very petroliferous acreage under generous fiscal terms as held by the first movers, contrarians or bid round winners;
access to less expensive funding;
proximity to or monopoly of mid-stream facilities or markets; and
expertise in E&P know-how, strategy execution and risk management, which is generally considered to be less durable than (1) to (4).
Without further ado, let us look under the hood of the asset portfolio of GeoPark to see if it guarantees low cost operation and whether it facilitates durable growth into the future.

2. GeoPark: Its asset portfolio

Since its founding in 2002, GeoPark has managed to amass a net total of 3.25 million acres of land in 28 contract blocks in ten sedimentary basins across five countries in Latin America (Fig. 1; Table 1). Such a portfolio of assets is regionally focused, consists of risk-balanced country franchises competing for corporate capital allocation, and has a visible trajectory of durable growth on a lengthy runway.

2.1. Regional focus

GeoPark aims to become a leading oil and gas explorer and developer with a regional focus on Latin America. Even with its increasingly feasible business environment, the region has relatively few independent players vying for abundant opportunities offered by a richly endowed hydrocarbon resource base. It boasts the petroleum-rich Andean foreland basins and South Atlantic passive continental margin. The region ranks as one of the highest potential hydrocarbon resource provinces in the world with multiple sedimentary basins where oil and gas have been discovered and produced.

Such a region ideally matches the capabilities of GeoPark. The company chose the conservative route of finding and developing hydrocarbons in proven oil and gas provinces which, nonetheless, have been inadequately developed or prematurely abandoned for economic, technical, funding or other reasons; it is typically attracted to projects which have confirmed hydrocarbon systems and existing infrastructure with upside of unexploited low-risk exploration and re-development. It typically forgoes out and out wildcatting.

As compared with the U.S., where some 6,000 upstream players compete for opportunities, there are only a few handfuls of nimble independents operating in Latin America (Exhibit 1). A less crowded competitive landscape tends to offer ampler opportunities and conduce to higher investment returns.

2.2. Asset accumulation process

GeoPark follows a process rarely seen in small independents "to acquire good projects in the right basins in the right countries with the right partners and at the right price". The company identifies high-value proven petroliferous basins based on geological, geophysical, engineering, operational, legal and financial analyses and due diligence, and then patiently waits for the right time - when asset prices have not been inflated into a bubble - to enter and build strategic positions with a long-term perspective, as its entry into Colombia, Brazil and Peru has demonstrated (Exhibit 2). It reportedly does not use simplified '$/boe' metrics to select assets for acquisition.

GeoPark prefers a larger-scale portfolio with multiple projects in several countries, which is believed to be able to protect the downside risks caused by any underperforming individual asset, yet offers the flexibility to pick from multiple options the most promising projects for concentrated investment. By pursuing a multi-country, diversified portfolio of assets, it maintains a flexibility at the corporate level to allocate capital to the highest value-adding projects selected from hundreds of projects generated through bottom-up review. Warren Buffett would have approved such a business approach. For example, out of 150 projects reviewed, it decided to deploy in 2017 some $60-65 million of capex to Colombia, $10-12 million to Chile, $5-7 million each to Brazil and Argentina, and $0.5-1 million to Peru.

2.3. Inside a franchise

In the targeted countries, GeoPark made it a policy to establish self-funding, independent subsidiaries, each of which has an inventory of attractive exploration opportunities supported by cash flows generated from producing underlying reserves, all tied together by an overall corporate organization, which pushes for operational efficiency, financial synergy and risk diversification. Its characteristic way of business development resulted in a number of self-sustaining franchises. These currently include the Magallanes natural gas franchise, the Llanos oil franchise, the Brazilian franchise, the Morona oil franchise and the emerging Argentina franchise (Exhibit 2). According to the annual report of GeoPark, its "focus is always to build a larger scale balanced portfolio that includes lower-risk short term cash flow generating properties, mid term medium-risk development projects, and longer term higher-risk big upside projects. This permits steady secure growth with an opportunity for accelerated high growth 'home-runs' from the bigger projects."
Take Colombia as an example of country franchise building. The interest of GeoPark in Colombia dated back shortly after its founding. However, the company waited for the 2010-2011 oil and gas mini-bubble to burst. It finally found a window of opportunity in early 2012 to make inroads into the country. It decided to acquire two companies simultaneously, instead of one, to stick to its risk-balanced principle: one company had mainly proven production and reserves to provide it with a steady cash flow base, and the other company had highly prospective exploration license blocks. Within two years of entering Colombia, GeoPark had made a slurry of oil discoveries in block Llanos 34, establishing that block as the source of strong cash flow in the Colombia franchise (Exhibit 2). The company has an inventory of prospects in the Llanos blocks, which were drilled for medium-term reserve and production growth, as well as Abanico and VIM 3 blocks in the Magdalena Basin for high risk exploration.

2.4. Visibility of durable growth

Guess what would happen if a carefully constructed portfolio of license blocks was given to a reconstituted team of geoscientists and petroleum engineers who had, at the reputed Petrolera Argentina San Jorge S.A., discovered over 600 MMbbl of oil in the 1990s before Chevron took over in 1999 for $1.2 billion. The clue is in Table 3 which shows a list of notable oil and gas discoveries made by GeoPark since 2006. In the decade of 2006-2016, it discovered a gross total of 246 MMboe of 2P reserves, with a cumulative exploratory drilling success rate of 70% overall and as high as 100% in the Llanos Basin, Colombia. Exploration success led to significant organic reserve additions in Chile and Colombia (Fig. 4), whilst acquisitions added petroleum reserves in Colombia, Brazil and Peru (Exhibit 2). According to its 2016 year-end oil and gas reserve report, independently certified by DeGolyer and MacNaughton (D&M) under the PRMS methodology, net proven (1P) reserves were at 78.3 MMboe, with 1P reserve life index of 9.5 years and a 1P reserve replacement index of 187%; net proven and probable (2P) reserves increased to 142.8 MMboe, with a 2P reserve life index of 17.4 years and a 2P reserve replacement index of 312%.
The balance between natural gas and crude oil reserves reversed in 2012, when a series of new oil finds were struck in Colombia. During the past seven years, 2P reserves have been growing at a CAGR of 39.9% for oil, -1.3% for gas and 19.0% for total hydrocarbons (Fig. 5). Reserve life for oil and total hydrocarbon have been rising over the last three years to 18.5 and 17.4 years, respectively, while that for gas has dropped slightly to 14.4 years (Fig. 6). The shortening of gas reserve life resulted from less stellar gas reserve replacement, with reserve replacement index ranging from 22% to 603%; on the other hand, it replaced between 351% and 1,040% of oil reserves in these years (Fig. 7).
Looking ahead toward the future, GeoPark has plentiful exploration resources, from which proven, probable and possible reserves can be converted and booked. According to a Gaffney, Cline & Associates audit, which covers 98% of all company-owned exploration resources beyond its known and certified oil and gas proven, probable and possible reserves, it as of end-2014 has a total of 768-1,465 MMboe of exploration resources, 94% in oil and 6% in gas, as in 148 short-, medium- and long-term opportunities of varying size and risk in acreage across Latin America. These opportunities include 112 prospects, 30 leads, 4 plays and 2 unconventional projects; some 38% of the total conventional exploration resources are in prospects, 35% in leads and plays, and 27% in unconventional resources.

Because an expanding reserve base is the primary driving force behind growth in hydrocarbon output, it follows from the afore-discussed reserve trends that a continual uptrend for the total hydrocarbon production seems to be a high-probability event in the near- and medium-term future for GeoPark. Total hydrocarbon production has been increasing at a CAGR of 36% over the last decade (Fig. 8), and at 21.6% over the last six years (Fig. 9). The Colombian franchise clearly did the heavy lifting so far (Fig. 10), though, going forward, the 41 MMbo (2P, Ryder Scott) Situche Central field in the Morona block, Peru, is expected to become a main contributor for production growth beginning 2018 when it is planned to come on stream (Exhibit 2).
We have witnessed enough cases of ambitious management destructing business value under the pretext of pursuing growth. It is thus critical to examine whether the historical growth of GeoPark has been creating value for outside shareholders.

First, while GeoPark raised equity in private placings or in stock markets since 2006, shares outstanding have been creeping up at a good clip of 11.32% per year between end-2005 and March 31, 2016, and at a slightly slower pace of 7.09% annually from 2011 to 2015 (Exhibit 4). We would like to know whether such an extent of equity expansion has led to the shrinkage of an average shareholder's share of the pie. Equity dilution is generally a perennial bane of cash flow-poor micro-caps and small-caps. By examining progression of fundamental parameters on a per share basis, we can refute whether the GeoPark management has so much diluted the equity base that it harmed shareholder interest.

The per-share 2P reserves of the company, more or less moving in lockstep with total 2P reserves, have nearly doubled in the six years between 2008 and 2014 (Fig. 12). Elsewhere, we learned that per-share 2P reserves continued the uptrend and reached 2.17 boe and 2.40 boe, respectively, in the next two years. The similar uptrend exists for the NPV of 2P reserves, hydrocarbon production and adjusted EBITDA, all on a per share basis. Therefore, shareholder value has not been damaged by equity issuance. It seems that, once money in hand, the company has also put it to efficient use, judging from the per-share trends (Fig. 12).
Second, per-share shareholder value expansion generally results from any combinations of net asset value expansion, earnings power enhancement, and accelerated growth. Fig. 12 appears to imply that the historical growth experienced by the company has been value adding for shareholders on a per share basis because topline uptrend in reserves and production is accompanied by bottom line increase in NPV and EBITDA.

As a consequence of capital intensity and long project lead time, petroleum investment return tends to respond to capex in a lumpy and delayed manner, which is further complicated by the ebb and flow of oil prices. The link of income statement to true long-term prospect of business is thus obscured oftentimes. Since it achieved first net profit in 2008, GeoPark has recorded profit from 2010 to 2014 but booked loss in 2009 (the Great Recession) as well as 2015-2016 (the latest oil crisis). With regard to adjusted EBITDA, it remained in the positive territory since 2008. Net profit margin was between 5.1 and 12.0%, ROA between 1.2 and 4.8%, and ROE between 2.3 and 11.1% in the net profitable years (Attachment 1). Therefore, GeoPark seems not to have been a proverbial cash cow as far as conventional profitability measures are concerned. However, we must recognize the fact that GeoPark, still an inchoate firm, substituted accounting profitability for fundamental growth, just like Amazon has been doing all along.

Last, there is yet another source of shareholder value creation hidden behind the country franchises. Because each country franchise operates within one single tax regime, the expenses incurred for exploration helped lower the taxable operating income, thus creating a tax efficiency. Such a tax advantage equals an almost infinite-termed, zero interest loan taken from the government treasury, which is then deployed to, e.g., exploration programs at no capital costs for accelerated growth in assets and enlarged cash flows.

3. The management

The core operating team at GeoPark consists of a group of geoscientists and petroleum engineers who had worked together at Petrolera Argentina San Jorge S.A., which was acquired by Chevron in 1999. Leading the team are CEO, Dr. James Park, and Chairman, Gerald O'Shaughnessy. Park received a salary of $750,000 in 2015 and performance-based stock options in some years. O'Shaughnessy, paid $275,000 in 2015, has also been receiving stock options and buying and selling company stock now and then. Each of these two founders owns around 13.2% of the company. They, together with Juan Cristóbal Pavez, a director representing Steven J. Quamme of Cartica Management, control approximately 47% of the common shares outstanding. The other insiders own an additional 2% of the shares outstanding. To grant stock options under its employee long-term incentive program without diluting the equity base, the company resorted to open-market purchase of its own stock in the past. Some 400,000 shares were bought in late 2013 for this purpose.

The Board of Directors of GeoPark approved in December 2014 to repurchase up to $10 million of common shares, after the stock price had undergone a 40% decline as a result of the oil price crash. Only $1.4 million were actually spent by the expiry of the program. Therefore, it resumed the program in April 2015.

3.1. The barbell strategy

The GeoPark way of doing things sometimes seems odd for a micro-cap. From choosing accounting method to go by to setting corporate development strategy, it seems that GeoPark thinks like a large-cap firm ten times its size. It chose to use the successful-efforts method of accounting favored by large oil companies, despite of its tendency to cause wild fluctuations in net income and occasional lower book value for small operations (Johnston and Johnston). It is probably the only micro-cap energy company that follows a portfolio construction policy of risk balance and diversification, which typically requires a great number and large variety of assets and favors a larger-scale portfolio with numerous projects in multiple countries. It reckons that such an asset portfolio bestows on it lower downside risks through diversification and efficiency in capital allocation. To accommodate such a capital flexibility, the company seeks to maintain a high degree of operatorship in a majority of the blocks and concessions in which it has working interests (Table 1). It pursues a long-term investment approach, without toying with any short-term "exit strategies". It is known to have the patience to wait for years to "grab the bigger prizes", which should be "in the right basins in the right countries with the right partners and at the right price". For example, it actually walked the talk and entered Colombia and Peru strictly following its portfolio policy. But it earned equal amount of respect by being able to walk away from the crowded Mexico Round 1.3 (Exhibit 2).

With an appreciation of the inherent uncertainties associated with the E&P industry, the company takes a holistic approach to managing risks. This involves, through a balanced mix of organic asset expansion and opportunistic acquisition, constructing a portfolio which consists of a varied blend of lower-risk, cash flow-generating, oil and gas-producing properties and high potential exploration assets, conducting operations under a work program with unbiased exposure to production, development and exploration projects, and financing operations with capital raised from diverse sources.

We commend the strategy adopted by GeoPark in constructing its asset portfolio. By maintaining a portfolio of assets composed of cash flow-generating fields and upside exploration opportunities within each of its country franchises, it intentionally or inadvertently follows the so-called barbell strategy advocated by Nassim Nicholas Taleb of the Black Swan fame. The barbell strategy, as Taleb describes it, is a bimodal, dual approach to pursue system antifragility by playing it safe in one domain on the one hand while taking a lot of small risks in an opposing domain on the other hand, thus achieving an overall robustness in face of disastrous black swans while benefitting from exposure to positive black swans. Within a country franchise, it milks the assets with existing or near-term production to generate a cash flow, which helps the company sustain industry recessions, like the one we are exiting from now, and, once the industry condition looks up, uses that cash flow to tax-efficiently fund the high-risk exploration programs in the other assets, till it "finally struck bonanza". In this strategy, risk-averse defensive play cuddles up nicely with risk-liking offensive move aiming for outsized reward.

3.2. Low cost financing

According to GeoPark, "We seek to maintain a prudent and sustainable capital structure and a strong financial position to allow us to maximize the development of our assets and capitalize on business opportunities as they arise. We intend to remain financially disciplined by limiting substantially all our debt incurrence to identified projects with repayment sources. We expect to continue benefiting from diverse funding sources such as our partners and customers in addition to the international capital markets."

Its financial discipline can be better illustrated by reviewing how it went to great lengths in securing funding at a cost level which in most cases would not even be accessible to a firm of its size and juniority. For example, in 2007, it took advantage of a window of opportunity presented by the decision of Argentine government to impose forbidding restrictions and duties on natural gas export, which had put the $1.2 billion, Chilean methanol plant of Methanex in peril, to pre-sell future gas production at almost twice of the price under the previous contract for a sum of $40 million, which was then used to explore for, develop and produce the natural gas which it had agreed to deliver. Methanex might have been a bit under the sway of International Finance Corporation (IFC), a member of the venerated World Bank Group, which had become a major equity investor in it a few months earlier and now happened to be there to attest on its behalf. At any rate, the interest rate on the $40 million loan was irresistible: LIBOR even. Two years later, it signed another pre-sell agreement with Methanex, this time for $15 million, and eventually managed to recruit the methanol producer as working interest partner in natural gas exploration (Exhibit 3 and 4).

GeoPark went IPO on the London AIM market as early as 2006, near the top of the commodity bubble, raising $35 million permanent capital. Becoming a public company lent it the precious access to the capital markets, helped forge a base of institutional shareholders, and made it possible to use stock options for employee incentivization. After the IPO, it went to the public market quite a few times both to raise equity capital and to issue bonds. Steven J. Quamme of Cartica Management became a 16% strategic shareholder through this route. To address the low trading activity situation on the AIM, Geopark moved in early 2014 to the NYSE to reach a wider circle of investors (Leonard) and to raise an additional $100 million of equity. However, it only resorted to commercial banks twice to borrow money for opportunistic acquisitions of cash flow-generating, hence low-risk, assets. During the oil crisis between 2015 and 2016, when all forms of capital became expensive, it did not raise any money (Fig. 13; Exhibit 4).