Fujifilm's Long Transformation Process Heading In The Right Direction
Fujifilm has shown that it can reinvent itself, and a stronger footing in healthcare should help it overcome growth challenges in its office equipment/document businesses.

Image-based healthcare IT is still a growth opportunity for Fujifilm, as is its biopharmaceutical manufacturing operation, but novel drug development is a riskier, more expensive undertaking.

While investors may legitimately worry that Fujifilm is spreading itself too thin, the growth of the healthcare business should support 5-6% FCF growth and a FV 10% above today's price.
Japanese companies used to have a well-deserved reputation for being stodgy; while concepts like just-in-time inventory were adopted relatively quickly, many companies have allowed themselves to become lumbering conglomerates that are slow to jettison operations with poor future prospects for growth or economic returns.

That's not so true with Fujifilm (OTCPK:FUJIY), as this company has launched two significant transformations in the past two decades - one designed to give the company life after the decline of photographic film and a more recent one intended to offset weakening prospects for office equipment. Fujifilm is arguably underrated for its healthcare business and it is this part of Fujifilm that has the best prospects for taking the business forward. Although success in drug development is by no means assured, even modest expectations would seem to support a fair value 10% higher than today's price.

A Morphing Conglomerate

Like a character out of anime or manga, Fujifilm seems to be quite willing to transform itself in response to changing circumstances and challenges. While the company's pivot away from photographic film 20 years ago was imperfect (the move into office equipment and specialty films worked out, the move into cameras not so much...), a more recent re-positioning towards healthcare has gone well and still seems to offer meaningful upside. That said, managing the glide path for less exciting opportunities like printing/office-related equipment and services remains an ongoing challenge.