Pfizer's Dividend Quality Is Very, Very Good
Summary

PFE has spent the last seven years trying to bring its dividend back up to pre-Wyeth levels.

The current dividend is only using about half of its FCF, so it is very safe and has lots of room for future raises.

In the middle of its historical range in terms of yield, the stock is fairly valued at 3.7%.
Pfizer (NYSE:PFE), along with the other mega-pharma companies, pay sizable dividends in order to reward shareholders with all the extra cash that is generated during the year. This is a big piece of the total return picture for PFE and others and for that reason, the dividend is more important to investors in this space than perhaps it would be in others. The yield is important, but it is also necessary to understand how PFE pays for its ample dividend. This is needed to assess both current safety and future growth potential, which I shall do now.

As a note, data for this exercise was lifted from Morningstar.

We'll begin by taking a look at the per-share payout for the past decade to ground us on where PFE has been.
Obviously, the first thing worth noticing is Pfizer's huge dividend cut that took place in 2009 in connection with the Wyeth acquisition. For anyone who owns PFE for the dividend - and there are a lot of you out there - that was obviously a significant problem. Maintaining and growing the dividend is a sacred duty of management teams of mature, high-yielding companies, and surely some investors felt left out in the proverbial cold in 2009. What's more, despite nice growth since 2010, the dividend is just getting back to where it was before the cut. That's a very long time to make investors wait to restore the former payout, something that certain large bank investors can commiserate with as well. At any rate, PFE is trying to get its payout back to where it once was, so let's take a look at how it's paying for the increases.
We can see that in a few of the years shown, PFE's dividend is actually more expensive than what it can "afford" according to net income. In addition, PFE's net income is almost always littered with non-recurring charges due to its ever-changing workforce and other writedowns. At any rate, if you were to look at 2014 through 2016 and compare net income to the dividend, you'd probably be very worried PFE was unable to afford to continue to raise the payout. However, there is a better way.
As we can see, PFE's FCF is huge and much stronger than its net income. In addition, since the dividend is a cash cost in terms of physically making payments to shareholders, that cash has to come from somewhere. And since net income is a non-cash accounting metric, that cash cannot come from earnings. That means that understanding how a company produces cash to make dividend payments is critical, and it is safe to say that Pfizer does a really terrific job of creating cash every year.
We can see that PFE's FCF coverage peaked at about 70% in 2007 but spent the bulk of the years since then under 50%. That means Pfizer is, on average, using under half of its FCF for the dividend. Payouts don't become constrained or have their safety suffer until the 80%+ area, and PFE is a very long way from there. That means that not only is PFE's current payout very safe from a financial perspective, but it also has room to continue its growth indefinitely, given the rather modest annual bumps management has elected in recent years. That's great news for dividend investors as there is no real financial risk to the dividend. I can't speak to what management may or may not do with respect to another huge merger at some point in the future, but from an affordability perspective, PFE is very strong, and that should be quite comforting to shareholders.

In terms of the actual yield, PFE's share price normally doesn't move around that much, and the dividend follows suit. This chart from Simply Wall Street shows us PFE's historical yield, and we can see that the current yield in the mid-3% range is pretty normal for this stock.
The bottom line on PFE's dividend is that it is important to ignore the payout ratio and use FCF instead. On that basis, the dividend is extremely affordable and allows PFE flexibility not only with respect to raising the payout over time but also with doing other things like servicing debt and buying other companies, which we all know it is very fond of doing. The yield is certainly very high, and from a purely financial perspective, it is ultra-safe. Management reserves the right to do something out of the ordinary like it did with the Wyeth acquisition, but the odds of that are obviously low. At this point, PFE just looks like a very safe, high-yielding stock that I'm comfortable labeling as a bond-equivalent; it's that good.

