A Growing Specialty Mix And Improving Acrylics Bode Well For Arkema
Arkema has done a good job of shifting its business mix towards more specialized products where customers pay (more) for performance and where it has meaningful market share.

A recovery in the acrylics market will help margins, but the above-average growth potential of specialized businesses like adhesives, as well as the opportunity to grow further through M&A, is the key.

Trading a little below 7x forward EBITDA and undervalued by about 5% to 10% on the basis of 5% to 6% FCF growth, Arkema looks interesting at today's price.
France's Arkema (OTCPK:ARKAY) (AKE.PA) is far from unusual in trying to shift away from commodity chemical businesses in favor of specialty businesses with higher margins and less competition, but the company has nevertheless done a good job of making that shift. I believe that at least 70% of the company's earnings can now legitimately be said to come from specialty businesses, and it has the opportunity to buy its way toward an even richer mix.

In addition to the better growth and margin potential of specialty businesses like adhesives and sealants, Arkema's commodity acrylics business could be looking at a cyclical improvement in the coming years. Looking at the cash flow potential of the business, the shares look as though they could be 5% to 10% undervalued, which I believe is enough in this market to merit a closer look. I would note that Arkema's U.S. ADRs aren't as liquid as an investor might like though, and so I'd suggest at least considering the Euronext-listed shares.

A Leader Across The Board

Spun off from Total (NYSE:TOT) about a decade ago, Arkema was once a much more commodity-type chemical company, with large positions in cyclical businesses like vinyls and acrylics. Arkema still has a large presence in the cyclical commodity acrylics business, but divested the vinyls business some time ago and has made numerous moves to build out its specialty business. What's more, the company has done so with an eye toward the benefits of market leadership, and it is the #1, #2, or #3 player across about 90% of its portfolio.

Arkema's Coatings business includes its legacy upstream and downstream acrylics businesses and contributes around a quarter of the revenue, but only about 10% to 15% of EBIT and EBITDA. Arkema has 15% global share (good for the #3 position) in the acrylic monomers business, where it competes with the likes of BASF (OTCQX:BASFY), Dow (NYSE:DOW), and Evonik (OTC:EVKIY) to serve markets like coatings/adhesives and absorbents (used in diapers and hygiene products). While the North American and European markets are pretty consolidated (a half-dozen or less major players), the Asian market is still much more fragmented and the margins here are much more volatile. This business segment also includes downstream products like resins and additives, with similar end-markets and competitors in most cases.

Arkema's Industrial Specialties business contributes roughly one-third of revenue and earnings and more specialized than the upstream acrylics business. PMMA (acrylic glass) is the largest individual part of this segment at around one-third of segment revenue), and Arkema is the second-largest player in the world behind Evonik. Thiochemicals is another significant part of the business, and Arkema has significant share here (around 45%) in a virtual duopoly with Chevron Phillips. Thiochemicals are sulfur-based products used in applications like animal feed, gas odorizing, and refining and the production process is difficult enough that competition is limited. Other businesses within this segment include fluorogases (used in refrigeration and air conditioning) and hydrogen peroxide (used to bleach pulp/paper).

Arguably the most interesting business for Arkema's future is the High Performance Materials segment, which presently contributes close to 50% of revenue and a little more than half of earnings. The biggest part of this business is now adhesives and sealants after the acquisitions of Bostik and Den Braven. These deals made Arkema the third-largest player in adhesives, well behind Henkel (OTCPK:HENKY) and in the mix with Sika (OTC:SXYAY) and H.B. Fuller (NYSE:FUL). Arkema is stronger in non-wovens at this point, and adhesives are an attractive market as they are replacing mechanical fasteners in a wide range of applications (construction, autos, aerospace, and so on). It is also a very fragmented market, though, as the top 10 players have less than 40% revenue share, so it is an area where I expect Arkema can and will do further M&A in the future.

In addition to the adhesives and sealant businesses, Arkema's HPM business includes PVDF, where it is the #1 player in the world with 40% share (ahead of Solvay (OTCPK:SVYZY)), and specialty polyamides where it has 35% share (competing with Evonik and EMS (OTC:EMSHF)) for PA10, PA11, P12 - a range of products used in applications like hoses/tubing, and electrical components. This segment also includes photocurable resins, organic peroxides, and the second-largest molecule sieve business in the world (a somewhat small, but high-margin market).

Continuing To Push Upmarket

Arkema's debt situation is okay and cash flow has improved significantly in recent years, but I do not expect management to start returning more capital to shareholders. Management has made it clear that it believes there are additional opportunities to exploit in specialty chemicals, and M&A is still very much a priority for capital deployment.

Adhesives and sealants are likely to remain an area of focus. For a variety of reasons, including lower weight and better performance attributes, adhesives are taking share away from mechanical fasteners in areas like construction, aerospace, and autos, and I expect that to continue. With that, I think adhesives can grow at a mid-single-digit rate for some time, a few percentage points better than most other chemical markets. With the industry still very fragmented and plenty of companies out there with good share in niche products, I think Arkema has a lot of options for capital deployment in M&A. While deal multiples are likely to look a little high (adhesives being an attractive market and all), the company's significant base business should give it better scale for expense-driven deal synergies.

While I think adhesives/sealants will get the most attention, it's definitely not the only option for the company. There are a lot of small specialty businesses out there that Arkema could pursue as tuck-ins for its existing businesses.

Cyclical Isn't Always Bad

While the acrylics business gets a bad rap for its greater cyclicality and lower margins, it's not necessarily a terrible business. Arkema does reap some in-house benefits from its acrylics capacity, and I would expect the market to become a little less volatile over time as the number of Asian operators consolidates from 20+ down toward the single digits or low double digits over time.

In the meantime, Arkema could be looking at an upturn in the business. The Coatings segment was very strong in the fourth quarter, with volume up almost 13% and EBITDA up almost 80%. This is not a normal situation; Arkema benefited from the fact that a meaningful percentage of global capacity went offline in the fourth quarter (particularly in Asia), pushing up margins significantly. A fair bit of that capacity will come back soon (it was offline largely for maintenance), but a plant closure by Dow and an accident at a BASF facility will mean that a mid-single-digit percentage of global capacity is out for an extended period of time.

There should also be some cyclical improvement on the way. Double-digit capacity increases in 2014 and 2015 pushed operating rates down and pushed down margins below a long-term sustainable level. That capacity is slowly being absorbed and a reasonably healthy global economy should allow for a return to normal mid-cycle margins in 2018 or 2019.

The Opportunity

I believe Arkema's greater leverage to specialty markets that can outgrow GDP will give the company the opportunity to generate 3% to 5% long-term revenue growth (closer to 5% in the short term, closer to 3% long term) with improving margins. I expect that this will always be a single-digit FCF margin type of business, but FCF margins in the 6% to 7% range should be achievable, supporting mid-single-digit FCF growth and a fair value about 5% to 10% above today's price.

I'd also note that the shares are trading a bit below 7x my 2017 EBITDA estimate. I do think there could be upside to 2017 numbers (Arkema has a nice run of quarterly beats going), and I would argue that a 7x multiple is not that ambitious relative to the company's specialty/commodity mix and the multiples that specialty businesses can/will get.

In terms of things to watch for, I think the volatility of acrylics margins is a "known unknown". I would also note that the company has benefited from competitor outages in the PMMA business and that higher input costs could weigh on margins in many businesses. While Arkema's end markets are diverse (consumer markets are 20%-plus of the mix, with construction, chemicals, industrial coatings, and general industrial all in the low double digits), the company needs a generally healthy global economy to do well, and weak oil/gas markets have been a headwind.

The Bottom Line

I like Arkema's growing specialty business(es), and I think management is making the right choice in prioritizing this as a use of capital. I also like the underlying idea that the acrylics cycle is past the low and on its way up. Return on invested capital has never been great here, and probably never will be on a sustained basis, but I factor that into my discount rate and I think the shares are worth a look today.