So says Matt Jacobson, who grew up surfing with his father in Manhattan Beach, Calif., and wearing the hand-sewn board shorts all summer long.

As an adult with deep pockets — he was one of the first employees at Facebook, where he now heads the marketing development — Mr. Jacobson, 56, decided many years ago that he wanted to buy Birdwell. His goals were to protect the legacy of the brand, which is more than 55 years old, and to ensure that the company stayed in Southern California and continued to make shorts the way it always has, with a human touch.

“There are few brands with Birdwell’s legacy, reputation and customer loyalty that haven’t been licensed or screwed up in some way,” Mr. Jacobson said in an interview. “That’s why they were so interesting to me.”

In 2014, he finally bought the company from its reluctant owners — the Birdwell family, whose enthusiasm for the business had flagged — and sold equity shares to friends who now run the company and have been turning it around.

The new owners have an aggressive plan for growth — one that may make the brand more of a household name. They are forging partnerships with other retailers, like J. Crew, to sell exclusive versions of Birdwell’s products. J. Crew’s chairman and chief executive, Millard Drexler, said by telephone that his company had been carrying Birdwell’s board shorts for three years.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


PROFILE IN STYLE
From the Beach to the Runway, the World of Kelly Slater AUG. 25, 2016

PULSE
Non-Surf Wear From Saturdays, Prada’s New Backpack and the Return of a Givenchy Icon JAN. 10, 2017
DRESS CODES
Custom-Made Is Spreading Far Beyond Savile Row FEB. 3, 2010
“We always loved the brand and the products, and we made attempts to buy it over the years,” Mr. Drexler said. “But then Matt was able to buy it, so he won and we won.”

Photo

In addition to men’s and women’s shorts for surfing and walking, Birdwell sells shirts, bags, hats, jackets and towels — all with a vintage beachy vibe, of course.

Mr. Drexler said, “It’s not a big business for us, relatively speaking, but it’s important to our customers and it sells out every year.”

Birdwell Beach Britches was started in Carrie Birdwell Mann’s living room in 1961. She made one product: two-ply nylon surfing shorts. The catalog from which people ordered was made using a copy machine. Its logo was designed in 1964 by Mike Salisbury, whose career has included creating designs for Levi’s, MGM and Michael Jackson.

Over the years, Birdwell’s shorts acquired a cultish following, especially among surfers. A pair can last for generations, and customers often send in photos of their father’s or grandfather’s board shorts, still going strong.

Yet over time the Birdwell family lost interest in maximizing their brand’s potential. Production peaked in the 1970s.

By the time Mr. Jacobson acquired it, the company had one facility running four days a week during the busy season and one day a week during low-demand periods. Birdwell barely had a digital presence and rarely changed product designs or selection.

Natas Kaupas, a friend of Mr. Jacobson’s who is now a co-owner of Birdwell and its creative director (as well as a semiretired professional skateboarder), recalled that if you wanted to buy shorts on Birdwell’s website: “The third step in the process was to call. They were so hard to get.”
Another friend of Mr. Jacobson’s, Geoff Clawson, left Facebook to become Birdwell’s chief executive in 2016.

The new owners have brought an industrial revolution to Birdwell. Their first priority was to move from wholesale to direct-to-consumer sales and build a web presence that would be the primary point of interaction with customers. The company now has Instagram and Facebook accounts.

Next, they redesigned the production space with the tenets of lean manufacturing in mind. Birdwell’s shorts used to be sewn one at a time, by one worker, but now employees cycle through several different operations each day, depending on what’s needed.
“Lean manufacturing and management informs my thinking every day, removing waste from processes and making everything more efficient,” Mr. Clawson said. “We literally rearranged the way employees physically work, putting them in closer proximity to their task.

“That shaves seconds off the production time, which results in more shorts being produced.”

The company’s recently renovated, 10,000-square-foot facility is bright and clean, with rows of sewing machines in the center and large cutting tables attached to the side walls. The back wall is a kaleidoscope of color, with rolls of brightly colored fabrics stacked tightly together.

Mr. Clawson’s ideas about efficiency come from his 20-year career in software development. Board shorts and software might seem quite unrelated, but Mr. Clawson says they aren’t.

“People get into this flow state — here it’s a sewing flow state — where they start producing at a certain speed and you don’t want to say, ‘O.K., stop doing that and now start doing this instead,’” Mr. Clawson said. “And that’s very much akin to software development. Engineers often talk about being ‘plugged in,’ and that means when you see an engineer with headphones on, it’s not the time to ask them where they want to go to lunch, because they are focused on solving a problem.”
“Lean manufacturing and management informs my thinking every day, removing waste from processes and making everything more efficient,” Mr. Clawson said. “We literally rearranged the way employees physically work, putting them in closer proximity to their task.

“That shaves seconds off the production time, which results in more shorts being produced.”

The company’s recently renovated, 10,000-square-foot facility is bright and clean, with rows of sewing machines in the center and large cutting tables attached to the side walls. The back wall is a kaleidoscope of color, with rolls of brightly colored fabrics stacked tightly together.

Mr. Clawson’s ideas about efficiency come from his 20-year career in software development. Board shorts and software might seem quite unrelated, but Mr. Clawson says they aren’t.

“People get into this flow state — here it’s a sewing flow state — where they start producing at a certain speed and you don’t want to say, ‘O.K., stop doing that and now start doing this instead,’” Mr. Clawson said. “And that’s very much akin to software development. Engineers often talk about being ‘plugged in,’ and that means when you see an engineer with headphones on, it’s not the time to ask them where they want to go to lunch, because they are focused on solving a problem.”