Karex: Wide Moat Hidden Champion With Long Growth Runway
Karex operates in a very attractive and growing condom manufacturing industry and it boasts significant competitive advantages to entrench its global market leadership.

Expansion of Karex own-brand products business will lead to significant earnings growth in the next few years.

My target price implies a 36% upside based on a 28 times P/E multiple applied to my forecasted FY2019 EPS of RM0.103.

Karex BHD (OTC:KRXBF) [MK:KAREX], the world's largest condom manufacturer, is a wide moat hidden champion with a long growth runway. Its competitive advantages include scale-based cost advantages driven by a large relative market share, proximity to key raw material sources, and high industry entry barriers favoring incumbents. Karex is expected to ride on the growth of the condom market, driven by the increase in worldwide average usage rate of condoms and the narrowing gap in condom usage rates between developing and developed nations. A game changer for Karex is the expansion of its own-brand products business which will be the company's most significant earnings growth driver in the next few years. I arrive at a target price of RM2.89 for Karex by applying a 28 times P/E multiple to my forecasted FY2019 EPS of RM0.103, which implies a 36% upside to its share price of RM2.13 as of March 8, 2017.

Company Description

Started in 1988 and listed in 2013, Karex is a Malaysia-listed condom manufacturer that also trades on an OTC basis in the U.S. It is the biggest condom producer in the world in terms of volume. Karex also manufactures probe covers, catheters and lubricating jelly, but condoms are still the main product accounting for more than 90% of sales. Karex generated 54%, 38% and 8% of its FY2016 (YE June) revenue from the commercial market segment (produces and supplies condoms to brand owners such as Reckitt Benckiser Plc (OTCPK:RBGLY) (Durex brand) etc.), the tender market segment (non-governmental organizations and various government agencies like United Nations Population Fund among others to purchase condoms to either distribute free or sell at a low subsidized price) and the OBM (own-brand market where Karex distributes the condoms directly to retailers under its owned brands) segment, respectively. It also derives the bulk of its sales outside of its home market Malaysia, with exports (distributed to over 130 countries) contributing over 90% of its revenue; Asia (including Malaysia) and Africa are the company's key markets accounting for 31% and 33% of FY2016 sales, respectively.