Hiring Pace Picks Up in Trucking Sector
Trucking fleets stepped up hiring at the fastest pace in five years in February, adding 10,600 jobs in a display of confidence as companies across U.S. industries ramped up payrolls.

Goods-producing private companies added 95,000 jobs last month, fueled by strong growth in construction and manufacturing, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday in a monthly employment report that suggested building momentum in the economy.

The hiring at trucking companies, which came after the industry cut payrolls by 5,100 jobs in January, was the strongest monthly gain in the BLS report since February 2012.

The growth comes as several measures for freight shipments and equipment orders suggest companies are more assured about demand growth in coming months. Friday’s jobs report pointed to stronger shipping in coming months, with manufacturing companies adding 28,000 jobs, hiring expanding sharply in the mining sector and construction growing amid mild winter weather.

“We’ve seen a lot of action this year on the industrial side of freight,” said Mark Montague, an industry pricing analyst with DAT Solutions LLC.

The gains in trucking offset a rare slip in employment in warehouse and storage companies, which cut payrolls by 1,500 jobs from January to February. Jobs in that sector, which has expanded as more consumers shop online, are still up more than 6% compared with the same month last year.

The transportation and logistics sector overall added 8,800 jobs in February.

Across the country, the U.S. economy added 235,000 jobs in February while the unemployment rate ticked down to 4.7%, suggesting a tight market for labor.

Swift Transportation Co., the largest North American truckload carrier, this week cited driver-recruitment as a problem as well as “intensely competitive pricing” as it reported that it expected at best to hit the lower end of its guidance range for earnings this quarter.

“We, like many others, expect industry dynamics to remain challenging in the first half of 2017 and then improve as we move into the latter half of the year,” said Richard Stocking, the company’s chief executive, in a mid-quarter update.