GrubHub: Not So Seamless After All
GrubHub is an over-hyped growth stock that is misunderstood by the market.

Having no barriers to entry, the company is defenseless against Uber and Amazon moving in to soak up market share.

GrubHub's customer acquisition cost is growing at a terrifying rate.

Thesis

GrubHub, Inc. (NYSE:GRUB) is an over-hyped growth stock whose growth prospects are misunderstood by the market. Despite big growth as a first-mover to the large online food and delivery service market, GRUB's business model is defenseless despite its perceived "network effect." GRUB's projected growth runway will be eaten up by competing products from goliaths: Uber and Amazon (NASDAQ:AMZN), which can both offer lower prices to consumers and operate at zero profitability to steal market share. The pressures have already been reflected by increasing CAC and a 4Q16 earnings pullback for lower-than-expected margin guidance for 2017. We think this is just the tip of the iceberg.

Overview

GRUB historically ran an online restaurant order aggregator in the US, primarily through the brands GrubHub and Seamless. Restaurants would place menus on GRUB's websites and customers would place orders through the online GrubHub portal. The company took ~15% of transaction value for obtaining the online customer order and routing it to the restaurant. The restaurant was responsible for delivery in this model, typically using a small local contractor. However, GRUB expanded its platform to include its own delivery fleet for restaurants. Use of this service requires an additional take of ~10% from the order total for restaurants. GRUB's fleet is paid near minimum wage by the hour - note that this necessitates an extra 15-20% tip for the driver, in addition to the delivery fee (which does not go to the driver). Currently GRUB connects 40,000+ restaurants and boasts 7.7+ million active diners.

The company sees its primary growth runway in the combined routing & delivery business (commonly known as RDS - "restaurant delivery services"). After a massive acquisition of the food delivery service Seamless, GRUB has spent ~$150mm acquiring four other RDS platforms in the past two years; namely, Restaurants on the Run, Delivered Dish, DiningIn, and LAbite. GRUB is focusing on Tier 1 and 2 cities (together, essentially all US cities with a major sports team).

Bulls argue that the food ordering and delivery market penetration is still in early innings and that GRUB is the biggest player in the space. They also think that GrubHub's first-mover advantage is protected by its platform's "network effect," locking in users and participating restaurants as the company grows. These investors reckon this network effect will allow GRUB to lead the race into an already lucrative market.

Why we disagree

Un-defensible business model: A large part of GrubHub's stellar trailing growth has been due to lack of large competition in the market. However, there is absolutely no switching cost to any parties benefiting from an RDS platform.

It's as simple as making an account or downloading an app, e.g. most people who have Uber on their phone also have Lyft. Same should go for GrubHub, UberEATS, Postmates, etc.

GRUB and its competitors have made it extremely easy for restaurants to get on their platform. RDS companies simply give a tablet to their restaurants to manage their orders without any POS (point of sale) integration. This makes it easy for restaurants to be on multiple platforms. In fact, there is no cost to restaurants to list on multiple networks, as commission fees are on a per-order basis. Restaurateurs who buy into the model in fact prefer to be on all platforms - it is free marketing.

This all means that when competition arrives, it will become an open-meritocracy that depends on smaller take rate to the restaurant, lower cost to the consumer, and performance of product (mainly delivery speed). There is little to suggest that customers or restaurants would stay exclusive with a particular platform for any other reason.

Uber and Amazon crush GRUB in a meritocracy: The equity research sphere, as well as GRUB's management, has largely dismissed UberEATS and Amazon Prime Restaurants as currently negligible threats as they are in early stages. UberEATS launched in April 2015, expanding to eight US cities in 2015 and now in 35 US cities (and 58 worldwide). There is a year-plus lag between city entry and becoming a competitive threat in that market (strategy, restaurant acquisition, and user acquisition all take time), so Uber is a few quarters away from serious order volume outside of a handful of localities. UberEATS operates very similarly to GrubHub/Seamless, but utilizes its existing driver network for delivery. Amazon is in even earlier stages, launching in Sept. 2015 and currently in 19 US cities. Amazon relies on its Prime Now delivery network and packages the delivery service with the Prime membership, whereas UberEATS actually charges a delivery fee.

However, we think these two players in fact pose a significant threat to all competitors, especially to the incumbent, GRUB. Uber and Amazon both trump GrubHub according to the RDS competition criteria outlined above.

Amazon/Uber/GrubHub have equal take rate to the restaurant: All three services take around 25-30% of order subtotal - Uber at 30%, Amazon at 25%, and GrubHub at roughly 25% as detailed previously. After speaking to many restaurant owners/managers, we found this 5% discrepancy is generally viewed as nominal. If a good restaurant wants to use one platform, they typically will post to all of them. The benefit of marketing on multiple platforms outweighs ceding an extra 5% take for the restaurateur who believes in the RDS system. Therefore, material-volume restaurants will eventually be on all three, meaning consumer choice will drive order volume between platforms.

All three platform list prices at in-restaurant menu prices. UberEATS currently charges a slightly higher delivery fee to the consumer than GRUB. However, GRUB drivers make most of their income through tips - hence, its online checkout layout aggressively suggests a 15%+ tip. UberEATS pays its drivers per delivery on top of guaranteeing a (much higher) hourly wage, so the Uber driver does not rely on tip. This means GRUB ends up with a ~10-15% higher total cost to customers over UberEATS (and Amazon, which charges no delivery fee).
As you can see from the chart above, we believe Uber's/Amazon's price advantage is a product of lower cost per delivery, not VC-esque cash burn. This is done through more effective driver utilization. Part of this is logistical prowess. Another part is that Uber and Amazon perform other services in off-peak hours (UberX and Prime Now delivery), whereas contracted GrubHub drivers wait around and fail to earn their necessary tips. Uber/Amazon also do not currently utilize batch delivery (delivering multiple items at once), which may become possible once their order volumes hit critical mass due to Uber's/Amazon's logistical expertise.

All Uber/Amazon cost advantages will go to straight to lower cost to consumer, widening their price advantage under GrubHub. Both UberEATS and Amazon were built with the strategy of cornering market share by reinvesting all profits; our channel checks confirm they seek to do the same with RDS projects. GrubHub as a standalone company cannot compete in a zero-profit game, much less a negative-profit game from competing against Uber's/Amazon's lower per-delivery costs.

UberEATS has slightly faster delivery times than GrubHub, due to its enormous driver network and logistical expertise (for easy evidence, see app reviews). AMZN is roughly the same as GRUB, but is still figuring out logistics. UberEATS already offers an equivalent service to restaurants and a superior service to consumers. When it reaches scale, we will see heavy impact via GRUB's earnings misses. If Amazon executes well, it has potential to inflict similar damage.

Cracks already showing: UberEATS and Amazon Prime Restaurants have been aggressively promoting in their current cities. The stress of new competition is already showing:

As the charts below show (Source - Left: GRUB Investor Presentation, Right: Our own models and metrics), competitors are making it significantly more costly for GRUB to maintain its growth numbers. GRUB's net CAC (incremental cost to acquire its next user, net of churn) has grown over 50% in the last year, from ~$54 in FY2015 to ~$85 in FY2016. Meanwhile, annual gross profit per user has stayed roughly flat over the last few years (around $40) despite increasing rev/order; this is due to declining orders per consumer. Its unit metrics disclosure is poor (no churn numbers and bad customer definitions...LTM users is a joke metric), but these indicators indicate a plummeting LTV/CAC. For a company expected to grow revenue over 30% while still growing EPS, this suggests one of those two will miss in coming quarters.
Lack of confidence from CEO: Matt Maloney has sold ~50% of his share (sold ~1.5% of CSO) since June 2014. He has also publicly spoken about how "dumb" the delivery business is, saying in an interview with Forbes that he'd "say [food delivery is] the dumbest business you could ever be in. Why run a break-even business?". On the topic of Amazon and Uber, Matt Maloney commented during the 1Q16 earnings call saying that "Uber and Amazon are the new boogiemen in the market. We also believe that having the lowest fees is critical…". It is important to reiterate that GrubHub in fact does not have the lowest fees.

Before moving on to the valuation, the last thing that might help to visualize how customers feel about GrubHub compared to its existing competitors. The chart below that we constructed by compiling app rates across both iOS and Android app stores speaks for itself:
Valuation

At an EV of ~$3.0B, we are investing at 7.3x 2017 gross profit (at consensus 30% rev growth and 65% gross margins). On an intrinsic basis, the market implies growth of 22mm orders per year for the next 10 years assuming 12x terminal FCF multiple, 20% FCF margin (MS took GRUB public and recently upgraded GRUB. It projects 17%.), and stepping rev/order up from $5 to $6 during the 10-year period of growth ($25/order * 25% take rate = $6.25, round down because the aggregation-only business decreases average order revenue). Order growth has been declining from 18mm to 16mm orders from FY2014 to FY2016. We think pricing in 22mm growth is far too generous. I have included charts from our modeling below:
We also think strong rev growth in coming years is highly unlikely without significant impact to EPS and cash flows (see GRUB customer acquisition troubles above). GRUB's premium valuation is predicated on its ability to generate strong earnings/cash flow and premium revenue growth in tandem; the current investor delusion that both can continue will fade. The most reputable software/Internet companies growing under 20% trade at 6x forward gross profit, suggesting a minimum 20% downside if the market continues to view GRUB as a strong business but realizes slow revenue growth. But as investors realize how Uber/Amazon will cause margin pressure far beyond what investors saw from the 4Q16 earnings release, we think there is further downside. We can see a scenario of 50% downside as GRUB dips to 3-4x forward gross profit (2-3x revenue) as these pressures are realized.

Acquisition risk is also nearly zero, as GRUB has trivial network effect and the space has lower barriers to entry. The only acquisition purpose would be for the existing user base; however at ~$370 EV/customer and ~$40 annual gross profit/customer, the pricing is expensive. Lyft, for example, would be better off simply making an app like Uber did instead of purchasing a platform at this exorbitant price.

Given all of this, we are very bearish on GrubHub and recommend shorting it. Since its last earnings disappointment, the share price has indeed dropped and the cost of puts has increased, but we believe there is still significant downside for GrubHub as the market begins to bake in all the factors surrounding the company.
