As VW Pleads Guilty in U.S. Over Diesel Scandal, Trouble Looms in Europe
FRANKFURT — Volkswagen took a big step toward resolving its legal problems in the United States when it pleaded guilty on Friday to its vast emissions deception. But in Europe, its troubles may be just beginning.

Across the Continent, the German carmaker faces not only an expanding criminal investigation but also thousands of lawsuits from consumers demanding recourse.

An Irish nurse wants compensation for the plunging value of her Volkswagen diesel car. Lawyers in London have filed the British version of a class-action suit. And a German seafood supplier claims it was tricked into believing it was going green by shipping shrimp and cod to market in a fleet of Volkswagen “clean diesel” vehicles.

The lawsuits are a potentially costly unknown, since there are far more diesel car owners in Europe than in the United States — and they only add to Volkswagen’s ballooning legal bill, which has weighed on profits and shaken management ranks.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Opinion Editorial
Europe’s Sluggish Response to VW MARCH 10, 2017

VW Executive Charged in Emissions Case Says He Was a Bit Player FEB. 25, 2017

Supplier’s Role Shows Breadth of VW’s Deceit FEB. 1, 2017

What Volkswagen Settlements Mean for Vehicle Owners FEB. 1, 2017
Already, Volkswagen has paid heavily for its crimes, as the American government has tried to take a tougher approach to corporate wrongdoing. After being accused of treating Wall Street too gingerly in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, the Justice Department, under the Obama administration, pushed in its final months to hold more companies and corporate executives accountable.

Volkswagen, which admitted to equipping cars with software to cheat emissions tests, has been a prime example of the aggressive new posture. The company formally pleaded guilty in a Detroit courtroom on Friday to federal charges that included conspiracy to violate the Clean Air Act and obstruction of justice. Six executives have so far been charged in the United States, and one engineer has pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud regulators and car owners.

It is too soon to tell whether the new attorney general, Jeff Sessions, will adopt the same approach as the previous administration. Separately, the fate of the executives’ cases is unclear, since five of the six people indicted are believed to be in Germany, which does not usually extradite its citizens outside the European Union.

But Volkswagen’s exposure in the United States has already dwarfed previous cases for vehicle manufacturers in pollution cases and safety malfunctions. Volkswagen agreed to pay $4.3 billion in civil and criminal penalties in the case brought by the Justice Department. It was just a piece of the overall $22 billion in settlements and fines in the United States.

“Volkswagen deeply regrets the behavior that gave rise to the diesel crisis,” the company said in a statement. “The agreements that we have reached with the U.S. government reflect our determination to address misconduct that went against all of the values Volkswagen holds so dear.”

General Motors, by comparison, paid $2 billion in fines and civil settlements over faulty ignition switches that left more than 100 dead. No executives were charged in the matter.

Takata, the Japanese auto parts maker, recently pleaded guilty to criminal charges linked to faulty airbags, agreeing to pay $1 billion in fines and penalties. Three Takata executives face criminal charges.

Daniel Riesel, a partner at Sive, Paget & Riesel in New York, said the Justice Department has been taking a noticeably harder line in recent corporate cases.

“They have made clear they are not going to be satisfied with a company plea, and would go after individuals when they can,” he said. “There is a lot of resentment against Volkswagen, and they have considerable evidence of guilt, so it is easy for the D.O.J. to follow through.”

Europe is now the big, possibly expensive, wild card that remains for Volkswagen. This week, consumer protection authorities from a group of European Union countries agreed to join forces to put pressure on the company to compensate car owners.

But the automaker, in contrast to its strategy in the United States, is refusing to negotiate with unhappy diesel Volkswagen owners.

It is betting instead that Europe’s less consumer friendly laws will allow it to avoid potentially ruinous financial damage. Volkswagen refuses to even admit that the emissions-cheating software that prompted the guilty plea in the United States is illegal under European Union law.
The scandal has exposed the stark differences between laws governing corporate behavior in Europe and the United States.

With a few exceptions, like Britain, most European countries do not provide for class-action suits, forcing owners to challenge corporations alone. Emissions regulations in the European Union are also full of loopholes, and it is harder to prove wrongdoing. There is no single agency in the bloc with the enforcement powers of the Environmental Protection Agency or Federal Trade Commission.

Volkswagen, for its part, has good reason to take a hard line in Europe.

In the United States, criminal and civil fines, settlements with owners and other costs have come to more than $22 billion for fewer than 600,000 vehicles. If it had to pay as much per car in Europe, where there are 8.5 million diesel Volkswagens with the emissions software, the cost would be more than $300 billion — enough to destroy the company.
Even in a worst-case scenario, Volkswagen is unlikely to have to pay more than a few thousand euros per car in Europe. Still, any additional financial burden would divert yet more funds that Matthias Müller, the company’s chief executive, would rather spend to develop new models and stay on the cutting edge of a shift to electric and self-driving vehicles.

Whatever the outcome in the European lawsuits, they will be a long-running headache for Volkswagen. While the American court proceedings were costly for the company, they were at least efficient.

The class-action lawsuits by owners were bundled into one case and settled in less than a year. In Europe, Volkswagen is facing thousands of legal pinpricks — lawsuits by owners brave enough to take on one of the Continent’s biggest corporations.

A nurse named Eithne Higgins, for example, has filed a lawsuit in a district court in Castlebar, in northwest Ireland. She argues that her diesel vehicle, made by a Volkswagen unit, has plunged in value because it is equipped with the software designed to fool emissions tests.

Her lawsuit has taken on broader significance because her lawyer, Evan O’Dwyer, is trying to use it to get Volkswagen to surrender large quantities of potentially incriminating documents. Unlike in the United States, courts in many European countries do not allow plaintiffs broad leeway to subpoena evidence from corporations.

Mr. O’Dwyer is cooperating with the firm managed by Michael Hausfeld, a Washington lawyer who played a major role in the class-action lawsuit against Volkswagen in the United States. Mr. Hausfeld, whose firm has an office in Berlin, has been trying to find creative ways to bring American-style litigation methods to Europe.

Wary of the precedent that might be set, Volkswagen has hired a prominent Dublin firm to defeat Ms. Higgins’s suit. Lawyers for Volkswagen have asked an Irish appeals court to rule that the lower court has no jurisdiction.

In other European cases, Volkswagen has argued on technical grounds that the software in the cars is not an illegal “defeat device” under the region’s rules.

The company admits that the software caused the cars to produce impermissible amounts of harmful nitrogen oxides. But the software worked by changing the way the engine functioned and did not affect the emissions control system. So, according to Volkswagen’s reasoning, it did not meet the European definition of a defeat device.

Volkswagen also argues that a recall underway across Europe fixes the emissions problem, claiming that customers have suffered no damage. A similar fix was not possible in the United States, which has more stringent limits on nitrogen oxides.

The extent of the legal threat to Volkswagen will become clearer once some of the cases reach appeals courts. Mr. Hausfeld and others hope that a successful case would encourage more plaintiffs to come forward.

But it is by no means certain that a higher court would rule in favor of vehicle owners.

By Volkswagen’s count, it has won more than three-quarters of about 2,000 lawsuits that have been decided by lower courts in Germany. The relatively small number of suits, out of 2.5 million diesel Volkswagens in Germany, is evidence that most customers are not unhappy, the company says.

“Consumer law is very weak in Germany,” said Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, a professor at the University of Duisburg-Essen. “You won’t get the big damages you get in the U.S.A.”

But Mr. O’Dwyer, the Irish plaintiffs’ lawyer, warned that Volkswagen would face a deluge of lawsuits if higher courts rule in favor of aggrieved owners.

“There are a lot of people waiting on the fence for things to happen,” he said.

