A Rising Market Now Confronts Heightened Risks
The stock market has continued to reach new highs, troubled only fleetingly by rising interest rates, sluggish corporate earnings and new and uncomfortable political realities.

Monetary policy is tightening, government spending is expected to expand substantially, and, as the American presidential election and the vote in Britain to leave the European Union show, trade relations and other ties among nations may be fraying. How those trends progress should go a long way to determining the performance of stocks and bonds as the year moves along.

These aren’t the only issues for investors to contend with, either. Economic indicators have perked up — unemployment in December, reported on Jan. 6, was 4.7 percent, and consumer confidence is near multiyear highs — but the earnings outlook remains subdued, stock valuations remain high and bond yields are low but rising. Under these circumstances, many investment advisers recommend taking only minimal, reasonably priced risks.

“I’m hard pressed to locate any investment where you can make a strong argument that it’s undervalued,” said Joe Davis, global chief economist at Vanguard and head of the firm’s Investment Strategy Group. “Just as the economic environment seems to be improving, the investment environment is more challenging. Investors have more risk in their portfolios than at any time since 1999.”

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


Forests Are a Treasure. But Are They Good Investments? JAN. 13, 2017

A Trillion-Dollar Question: Why Don’t More Women Run Mutual Funds? JAN. 13, 2017

FUNDAMENTALLY
The Bond Market Is Shifting, So Steady Yourself JAN. 13, 2017

Money Market Funds and C.D.s Show Signs of Life JAN. 13, 2017

Rebuilding Infrastructure May Be Profitable for the Very Rich JAN. 13, 2017
Ben Inker, co-head of asset allocation at the GMO investment firm, likewise finds “plenty of things to worry about.”

The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index early this month traded at about 26 times the earnings that the constituent companies reported in the previous year, higher than at almost any time in history. One reason that investors are willing to pay so much is that they see even less value in other assets.

“The rest of the world looks scarier than the U.S.,” Mr. Inker said. “Who would want to touch Europe? Who would want to touch emerging” markets? As scary as they may appear, he recommends investing in emerging stock markets as the best of a series of difficult choices. “It’s not that we have high hopes for the emerging world this year,” he said, “but they’re priced for a really bad outcome. The U.S. is priced for a really good outcome.”

American stocks had a really good outcome in 2016. The S.&P. 500 rose 9.5 percent, to 2,238.83, including a 3.3 percent gain in the fourth quarter.

The average domestic stock fund in Morningstar’s database rose 3.3 percent in the quarter and 10.9 percent on the year. Leading the way in the quarter, with double-digit gains, were portfolios that focused on financial services, smaller companies, energy and industrials.

Whether managers make the most of it, David Kelly, chief global strategist at J. P. Morgan Asset Management, finds solid prospects in American stocks this year, more than many of his peers do.

He favors sectors most sensitive to rising growth, such as financial services, technology and consumer discretionary stocks.

“The general trend of government policy will be pretty pro-business and much more friendly to the U.S. corporate sector than it has been,” he said. But he said that “the Republicans may get sidetracked by antitrade rhetoric.”

President-elect Donald J. Trump has proposed raising tariffs on imported goods, and some Republicans in Congress have proposed changing corporate tax rules to reward exporters and punish importers. Economists generally agree that higher tariffs reduce competitiveness and drive up prices of imported goods, including parts supplied to American manufacturers.

Mr. Kelly is also wary of Mr. Trump’s pledges to increase government spending on infrastructure projects.

“There isn’t actually any money in the budget to fulfill his agenda,” he said. “Congress may decide not to worry about it and push up the debt, and we’ll end up with more debt and inflation.”

And we may have higher interest rates, too. The Federal Reserve raised rates in December, only the second time in a decade. Mr. Kelly expects three, possibly four, increases this year.

The more forbidding rate environment may account for much of the run-up in bond yields last year. Yields on 10-year Treasury issues rose to 2.44 percent at the end of December from 1.36 percent in early July, with most of the increase occurring just after Election Day, according to Bloomberg.
Bond funds lost 1 percent in the fourth quarter, depressed by the 11.8 percent plunge in portfolios that specialize in long-term government issues. For the full year, according to Morningstar, the average bond fund was up 5.9 percent, helped by double-digit gains in riskier categories like high-yield and emerging market debt.

Laird Landmann, co-director of fixed income at the TCW fund-management company, said he saw little to recommend to investors because “asset prices are getting out of whack with the economy.”

Inflation is likely to keep rising, he predicted, perhaps exceeding 2.5 percent this year.

His advice is to play it safe and stick with Treasury bonds, certain mortgage-backed securities not issued or guaranteed by the federal government, and bonds issued by American banks.
“It’s hard to buy things after eight years of a credit cycle,” Mr. Landmann said. “Wait for it to turn; that’s the discipline of being a value investor.”

When considering any benefits of spending measures introduced by Mr. Trump and Congress, it’s important to remember that they wouldn’t be spread far and wide. Hope that the global recovery might at last get some legs helped emerging stock markets last year, but they gave back about seven months’ worth of gains in the week after the election, as investors weighed the prospect of Mr. Trump’s protectionist campaign language being translated into action.

The average emerging market stock fund lost 5.5 percent in the fourth quarter but still gained 9 percent for the year. International stock funds over all fell 2.8 percent in the quarter and rose 4.9 percent on the year.

Some of the worst-performing stock markets were in countries on which Mr. Trump has focused. Mexico lost 8 percent in 2016, and the Shanghai Composite index in China was down more than 12 percent, although funds concentrating on China and its surroundings rose 0.7 percent.

The president-elect’s outlook “is clearly antiglobalization,” said Rick Schmidt, co-manager of the Harding Loevner Emerging Markets Fund.

“Trade is going to have a bigger impact on some markets than others,” he said. “In emerging markets, clearly there are places where risk hasn’t retreated. Mexico is No. 1, China is No. 2.”

“Whether he can implement” his agenda “is one thing, but you have to assume he means it,” Mr. Schmidt added. “It would be dangerous not to take him at his word.”

Just as Mr. Inker prefers emerging markets because the risk they entail comes at the right price, Mr. Schmidt sees some of the best opportunities this year in beaten-down markets like Mexico.

Elsewhere, he finds India overpriced, and he is avoiding utilities and Chinese banks, although he likes banks in other countries.

Mr. Kelly also sees emerging markets as cheap and therefore good long-term plays, and he likes European stocks over the long haul, too.

While emerging markets are appealing to many based on their valuations, Mr. Landmann warned that they may be particularly vulnerable to potential missteps in a Trump presidency.

“Markets are not going to crash necessarily, but you could see crashes in more fragile areas like China,” he said.

Mr. Davis, at Vanguard, advised investors to make sure they are globally diversified and not overly dependent on American markets. He also encouraged them to expect less. “One risk for equity markets for 2017 is they are pricing in 4 percent economic growth,” he said. “I think that’s unlikely; they seem to be discounting risks to free trade.”

The economy has been growing at barely half that rate. “I’m not bearish on the economy,” Mr. Davis said, “but I think expectations on returns need to be lowered.”

Mr. Inker also suggested that investors keep their enthusiasm in check.

“I would have thought that the prospect of surprising statements coming out of the White House in the form of tweets would generate uncertainty, and markets don’t like uncertainty,” he said. “So far the U.S. market has not seemed to mind. We’ll have to see. This is uncharted territory.”