What happened
Shares of MannKind (NASDAQ: MNKD), a biopharmaceutical company primarily focused on the treatment of diabetes, plummeted 24% in February, according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. Despite the company offering a number of upbeat updates, one catalyst provided much of the downside spark.

So what
If investors choose to point their fingers, the blame for another poor month lies with MannKind's decision in early February to announce that it was tinkering with the idea of a reverse stock split, which has since happened. On March 3, MannKind reverse split its common stock 1-for-5.
Why such indigestion toward the reverse split announcement? Typically, stocks only reverse split after they've been in a long downward spiral and they're at risk of being booted off a reputable stock exchange. With MannKind's stock trading well below $1 per share prior to the split, it was at risk of being booted off of the Nasdaq and onto an over-the-counter exchange, which likely would not have helped its valuation.

It's also worth noting that when companies dip below $1 per share, most institutions and hedge funds won't buy shares. Thus, the reverse split is a defensive maneuver by management to make a company's stock more attractive to institutional investors, as well as remain listed on a reputable stock exchange.

On the plus side, MannKind announced new Titration packs containing varied doses of its Food and Drug Administration-approved inhalable diabetes drug, Afrezza. It also announced that it would be abandoning its contract sales organization in favor of an in-house marketing team for Afrezza.

Now what
While it's encouraging to see MannKind embracing an internal sales team for Afrezza, as well as varied dosing options which might make Afrezza more attractive to physicians and consumers, the company's lead drug is still one of the biggest launch disappointments of all time.
On paper, Afrezza looked as if it could be a blockbuster. It's indicated for type 1 or 2 diabetes, it's an inhalable product (meaning a reduced need for needles), it's fast-acting, and it's metabolized through the body in superior fashion to other insulins. Unfortunately, Afrezza was also pricier than traditional therapies, and it didn't have the rapport with physicians that existing therapies had. This has doomed Afrezza to a pittance in sales since its launch.

Making matters more complicated is the fact that MannKind is slowly whittling away at its available cash and capital. MannKind ended the third quarter with $35.5 million in cash, $30.1 million in credit available from the Mann Group, and $50 million in at-the-market common stock issuances. It also added $16.7 million from the sale of real estate in February and $30.6 million from Sanofi, its former licensing partner for Afrezza. This might sound like a lot of capital, but it's not, given how rapidly MannKind has burned through cash. In all likelihood, MannKind's cash raises mean even more dilution for existing shareholders.

Though MannKind has new ideas up its sleeve, the story continues to remain the same for investors: stay far, far away from MannKind's stock.

Shares of 3D bioprinting company Organovo Holdings Inc (NASDAQ:ONVO) dipped 15.7% in February according to data from S&P Global Market Intelligence. The market wasn't too pleased with drastic adjustment to the company's guidance for the current fiscal year.

So what 
Organovo's 3D bioprinted human tissues present an interesting opportunity for companies developing new drugs and cosmetics. Unfortunately, last month's earnings announcement poured fuel on a long-burning fear that the company's products will be viewed as an extra expense instead of a means to reduce development costs.

Although fiscal third quarter sales jumped about 251% over the previous year period to $1.2 million, the average Wall Street analyst expected $1.47 million. The miss wasn't the worst part of the announcement, though.

A drastic reduction to the company's forward revenue outlook discouraged investors the most. With less than two months to go, it reduced full-year revenue expectations from between $4.5 million and $6.5 million, provided in November, to between $3.7 million and $4.5 million.

Now what
Organovo's lead revenue streams are its human liver and kidney tissue, which it contends have a combined total addressable market of $3 billion annually. The company expects both could add about $100 million to its top line each year. At a recent market cap of about $318.5 million, Organovo stock could provide market-beating gains over the long run if it can ramp up sales to meet its projections in the years ahead.

On the one hand, the company has sold its tissues and services to 11 of the "Top 25" pharmaceutical companies, seven of which were new in the latest quarter. On the other hand, it noted just six of its previous customers repurchased products during the period. This suggests drug developers are keen to try the printed tissues, but they're hardly an instrumental component of their preclinical testing operations.

Organovo even went so far as to blame the customers waiting for validation studies to qualify their use for specific applications. Investors will want to keep their eyes peeled for regulatory agency comments regarding the use of its printed human tissues in preclinical testing. Until we know just how they can help reduce drug development costs, expect a great deal more volatility with this highly speculative stock.
Last year, Portola Pharmaceuticals suffered two big setbacks that forced it to go longer without any product revenue. In March 2016, shares took a drubbing after management reported mixed results from a trial evaluating its anticoagulant betrixaban. In August, shareholders were dealt another blow when management reported receiving an FDA rejection letter for its anticoagulant antidote, AndexXa.
fter it announced fourth-quarter earnings after the closing bell Monday, Akebia Therapeutics (NASDAQ:AKBA) saw its shares fall as much as 16% Tuesday morning, though they have recovered somewhat -- shares were only down 11.1% at 2:05 p.m. EST.
As a development-stage biotech, it shouldn't be Akebia Therapeutics' revenue or earnings -- or lack thereof -- that have investors worried. Investors know they will have to deal with it burning cash until it has a drug on the market.

Instead, it appears it this comment from CFO Jason Amello, courtesy of Thomson StreetEvents, might be the reason investors woke up worried about Akebia:

"Collaboration revenue in connection with our agreement with Mitsubishi Tanabe, which was executed at the end of 2015, is expected to commence in the second half of 2017, following the results of our Phase 2 studies being conducted in Japan. As such, the $40 million upfront payment we received back in 2015 remains in deferred revenue at the end of 2016."

In other words, some of the upfront payment from Mitsubishi Tanabe could be taken back if the development of Akebia's anemia drug vadadustat stalls in Japan, so it remains as deferred revenue. But as the buy-side biotech analyst whoo goes by just Zach on Twitter pointed out, the potential claw-back of the upfront payment has been in the public record since the deal was done:

those thinking $AKBA MTPC deal re potential refund of portion of upfront (pending jap regulator feedback) is new...it isn't, from '15 10-K pic.twitter.com/qlE7IQmAli

— zach (@zbiotech) March 7, 2017
Sure enough, there it is in the 10-K:

"In December 2015, we entered into a collaboration agreement with Mitsubishi Tanabe to develop and commercialize vadadustat in Japan and certain other countries in Asia for total milestone payments of up to $350 million, including up to $100 million in upfront and development payments, of which $40 million was received in January 2016. Of the $40.0 million received, $20.0 million is subject to refund to Mitsubishi depending on the outcome of discussions with the Japanese regulator about the global trial design."

Now what
Assuming the shares really were down because of the deferred revenue "revelation" and not for another reason -- like investors were hoping for a more-substantial update that didn't materialize -- the moral of the story is that investors should read companies' SEC 10-K and 10-Q filings. Sure, the material can be boring, but knowing the details of deals can keep investors from getting surprised about events that could change a company's cash situation.

Valeant can’t seem to catch a break.

Shares of the scandal-plagued pharmaceutical giant got hammered Monday after the company announced that it’s looking to push back the due date of some of its long-term debts, as well as pay down other obligations with the $1.1 billion it bagged in last week’s sale of its skincare lines to L’Oreal.

Instead of rejoicing at Valeant’s financial-engineering plans, investors took them as a sign of weakness and desperation, sending shares down 5 percent, to $12.

Valeant’s drop was another black eye for its top three investors, all of which are gold-plated hedge funds: John Paulson’s, Paulson & Co, Bill Ackman’s Pershing Square and Jeff Ubben’s ValueAct.

Shares are down more than 25 percent since Valeant reported earnings last week.

“We consider Valeant’s refinancing as a last attempt to salvage the company from what we would consider a likely default and restructuring,” David Maris of Wells Fargo wrote in a note entitled “VRX: Kicking The Can.”

Irina Koffler, an analyst with Mizuho Securities USA, fretted that Valeant’s business is so bad that it may not have any option other than to restructure.

“The timing of the refinancing suggests that the organic growth in the underlying business is uncertain and could take significantly longer than expected to play out,” she wrote in a Monday note.

Using figures provided in its fourth quarter regulatory filing, roughly $6 billion of Valeant’s $29.8 billion junk-rated debt load could be affected by a refinancing.

Pharmaceutical company stocks fell Tuesday after President Trump tweeted an updated vow to lower drug costs for Americans.

"I am working on a new system where there will be competition in the Drug Industry," Trump tweeted shortly before 9 a.m., repeating earlier promises on the issue. "Pricing for the American people will come way down!"

Trump has not yet provided any specifics on his plans to reduce drug costs for consumers. He is widely expected to use the government's vast buying power to force the pharmaceutical industry to compete on prices.

His latest criticism of pharmaceutical industry prices reprised a similar attack during his initial presidential press conference in January. "They're getting away with murder," he said at the time.

Trump slams 'disastrous' drug companies
Investors, who hammered drug stocks back then, again sold off pharma industry shares on Tuesday. The declines, which were greater earlier in the session, moderated as the afternoon wore on.

Shares of Mylan, (MYL) the drugmaker criticized last year for hiking prices on its EpiPen medication injector for allergy sufferers, was down 1.3% at $43.45 in afternoon trading.

Mylan's generic EpiPen hits market after fury over dramatic price hikes
Shares of Amgen (AMGN) were down 0.8% at $177.90. Robert Bradway, CEO of the California-based company, was among drug industry executives at a White House meeting in January during which Trump pledged to increase "competition and bidding wars big time."

Trump pledges fewer regulations, more competition for drugmakers
Shares of Perrigo (PRGO) a leading supplier of generics and over the counter medications, were 1.8% lower at $70.27.

Pfizer (PFE) and Allergan (AGN), the companies who scrapped their $160 billion tax-saving merger plan last year amid Obama administration opposition, both saw their stocks dip Tuesday after Trump's tweet. Allergan shares were 1.1% at $239.73, while Pfizer shares slid 0.9% to $34.05.

$160 billion Pfizer, Allergan inversion scrapped
Similarly, investors sent Eli Lilly (LLY) shares down 1.2% to $82.81. Merck, (MRK) which was also represented when Trump met with industry leaders, were down 0.8% at $65.95.

Some of the companies have previously announced efforts to hold down drug price increases.

Allergan CEO Brent Saunders outlined a new "social contract" with patients who rely on the company's medications in a September blog post that referred to public criticism of industry "outliers who have taken dramatic price increases — or engaged in what the public thinks of as price gouging, especially on life-saving medicines."

Similarly, Johnson & Johnson in January said it would soon issue a new transparency report that would include "expanded disclosures on U.S. pricing and value," along with expenses for research and development and marketing. The company's shares were up 39 cents to $124.10 in afternoon trading.

"I think it's incumbent upon us as an industry to price responsibly," Johnson & Johnson CEO Alex Gorsky explained during a conference call with investors.

